Add Docker tutorial (#1840)
alphagov/govuk-developer-docs: source/manual/intro-to-docker.html.md

---
title: Intro to Docker
section: Docker
layout: manual_layout
parent: "/manual.html"
last_reviewed_on: 2019-07-01
review_in: 6 months
owner_slack: "#govuk-developers"
---

If you are new to Docker here's a quick intro in the context of the GOV.UK stack.

## Install Docker

*   [Download Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started)
*   [Docker for Mac intro](https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/)

## Video explaining the concepts in Docker

[Docker, FROM scratch - Aaron Powell](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i7yoXqlg48M) - first 30 minutes

## Learn docker with content-publisher
This is a tutorial where we run a few things to get [content-publisher] up and running in Docker. This is a convoluted example but it will help to explain and familiarise the concepts involved.

> Note: in the examples to run shell commands:
>
> * `$mac` shell prompt denotes running the command in a terminal on your Mac
> * `$dev` shell prompt denotes running the command in the docker container

### Run a container from an image

* Make sure you have docker running:

```shell
$mac docker --version
Docker version 18.09.2, build 6247962
```

> * Run from the root of the [content-publisher] project:

Reviewer: There's a missing command under here...

Create a Dockerfile in the content-publisher project:

> Note: there will likely already be a Dockerfile, so just remove it for the tutorial.

*   Create a `Dockerfile` in the root of the [content-publisher] project:

```docker
FROM ruby:2.6.3

RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_12.x | bash

RUN apt-get install nodejs && apt-get clean
```

*   Build our new image:

```shell
$mac docker build -t content-publisher
```

This creates an image based on the Dockerfile we just added.

`-t` tags, or names it, as `content-publisher`.

*   Now we can start a container with our new image:

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm -v $(pwd):/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle content-publisher bash
```

Each time you change the Dockerfile, you need to remember to rebuild the docker image.

If we run the tests again, this time we see another problem about no database. That's because we haven't got PostgreSQL installed.

#### Use PostgreSQL image/container

> Our Javascript errors are now fixed, but we're getting new errors because we don't have a database. Docker containers are quick to start and it's possible for them to talk to each other, so let's set up a separate container for postgres.

Reviewer: The first sentence here repeats the sentence immediately above the last heading - I think we can remove one of them.

> *  In another terminal, if we run

Reviewer: We're not really explaining what this command does, just telling people to run it.

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm postgres
```

> * Now to see what containers you have, run:

Reviewer: Perhaps we should indicate what people should expect to see as the output of this command? (but tell them to ignore any other containers they may have if they've used Docker previously!)

```shell
$mac docker ps
```

* Find the ID for the postgres container, and with it run:

```shell
$mac docker inspect [container ID for postgres]
```

> Grab the IP address from the output. We will use that IP address to point the content-publisher container to the one running postgres. We'll need it so that rails knows where the database to run tests against.

Reviewer: `We'll need it so that rails knows where the database to run tests against.` - this sentence doesn't quite make sense.

*   Set these environment variables:

```shell
$dev export DATABASE_URL=postgres://postgres@172.17.0.3/content-publisher-dev
$dev export TEST_DATABASE_URL=postgres://postgres@172.17.0.3/content-publisher-test
```

> NOTE: The IP address will change randomly so you may need to update the IP address above each time you restart the container! See [Fixing IP with Docker Network]

*   Run the tests in content-publisher container:

```shell
$dev bundle exec rake db:setup
$dev bundle exec rake
```

> We have a database, but no where for the database to store data!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a database, but nowhere for the database to store data!
```

```

* Run the tests again:

```shell
$dev cd /apps
$dev bundle exec rake
```

### Fixing IP with Docker Network

IP addresses will be randomly assigned each time the container starts up, which can be a pain when you want containers to talk to each other. As was the case between the [content-publisher] and PostgreSQL containers we've been using so far.

Docker has the notion of Networks which you can provide to each container as a connection that they can use.

* Create a network:

```shell
$mac docker network create content-publisher-network
```

* Run the containers with the new network:

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm -v content-publisher-postgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data --network content-publisher-network --network-alias postgres postgres

$mac docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle --privileged --network content-publisher-network -e TEST_DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-test -e DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-dev content-publisher:latest bash
```

### All in one line command

> Run with cd-ing straight into /apps dir, with the `-w` flag:

Reviewer: This sentence confused me, I thought it was telling me to cd into `/apps` to start with before I realised it was an explanation of the command below. I don't think we need to explain the command, it's just a combination of everything we've discussed above - we can just say that.

```
docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle --privileged --network content-publisher-network -e TEST_DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-test -e DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-dev -w /app content-publisher:latest bash
```

> This is a lot to run in one command!

Reviewer: I feel like there's a section missing under here... something like:
```suggestion
This is a lot to run in one command!

Luckily, we can convert this long command into some YAML configuration which defines all the volumes and dependencies. We can then run that YAML file use [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/), for example:

`docker-compose run —rm content-publisher bundle exec rake`

We can even run the above command as a CLI script to make it shorter and more reusable between our repos. This is what [govuk-docker][govuk-docker] does.
```

By default gems are saved to `/usr/local/bundle` within the container. But everything in the container is destroyed and reset to the image when it's shut down.

We could mount that path to the same on your `$mac` but there is a Docker way of providing storage.

#### Persistent volumes

We don't want to be re-installing and doing setup every time we quit and re-enter a container. Docker allows you to create separate volumes for persistent data.

* Create a persistent volume for our gems:

```shell
$mac docker volume create content-publisher-bundle
```

*   Run docker with that volume by using the `-v` flag and passing it the name of the volume:

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm -v $(pwd):/app -v `content-publisher-bundle`:/usr/local/bundle ruby:2.6.3 bash
```

*   Then install the gems again:

```shell
$dev cd /app
$dev bundle install
```

This time the gems will install on the `content-publisher-bundle` which is mapped to the container at the `/usr/local/bundle` path.

> ### Specifying dependencies (node, PostgreSQL, Chrome)

Reviewer 2: I think there are really two separate things going on here, as per my comment below. One is about networking, and the other is about images/Dockerfiles. Since the section is quite long, it might also help the reader to split it up - we could have a 'Images (Revisited)' section or something to continue with installing Chrome.

Create a Dockerfile in the content-publisher project:

> Note: there will likely already be a Dockerfile, so just remove it for the tutorial.

*   Create a `Dockerfile` in the root of the [content-publisher] project:

```docker
FROM ruby:2.6.3

RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_12.x | bash

RUN apt-get install nodejs && apt-get clean
```

*   Build our new image:

```shell
$mac docker build -t content-publisher
```

This creates an image based on the Dockerfile we just added.

`-t` tags, or names it, as `content-publisher`.

*   Now we can start a container with our new image:

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm -v $(pwd):/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle content-publisher bash
```

Each time you change the Dockerfile, you need to remember to rebuild the docker image.

If we run the tests again, this time we see another problem about no database. That's because we haven't got PostgreSQL installed.

#### Use PostgreSQL image/container

> Docker containers are quick to start and it's possible for them to talk to each other, so let's set up a separate container for postgres.

Author: Not sure about more pre-amble as it's already a really long, wordy tutorial!

*  In another terminal, if we run the following to start a new container based on the postgres image:

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm postgres
```

* Now to see what containers you have, run:

```shell
$mac docker ps
```

And you should see (ignore any other containers you've got running):

```shell
$mac
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND                  CREATED             STATUS              PORTS               NAMES
a7b87be3e1bc        postgres            "docker-entrypoint.s…"   21 minutes ago      Up 21 minutes       5432/tcp            jovial_matsumoto
```

> * Find the ID for the postgres container, and with it run:

Reviewer 2: Since this section is quite a long one, it would help me to have a little preamble here saying that, although we've started the container, we need to find a way for them to talk to each other.

```shell
$mac docker inspect [container ID for postgres]
```

Grab the IP address from the output. We will use that IP address to point the content-publisher container to the one running postgres. Rails will use this to run its tests against.

*   Set these environment variables:

```shell
$dev export DATABASE_URL=postgres://postgres@172.17.0.3/content-publisher-dev
$dev export TEST_DATABASE_URL=postgres://postgres@172.17.0.3/content-publisher-test
```

> NOTE: The IP address will change randomly so you may need to update the IP address above each time you restart the container! See [Fixing IP with Docker Network]

*   Run the tests in content-publisher container:

```shell
$dev bundle exec rake db:setup
$dev bundle exec rake
```

> We have a database, but nowhere for the database to store data!

Reviewer 2: Would be clearer to say 'to store data when the container has stopped'.

Reviewer 2: Just to drive the point home, it might be worth repeating the bit before explaining how the container is 'reset' to the image - repetition helps with learning :-).

*   Create a volume to persist to for the data:

```shell
$mac docker volume create content-publisher-postgres
```

* Restart the postgres container in your other terminal window/tab:

```shell

> docker run -it --rm -v content-publisher-postgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data postgres

Reviewer 2: Just like for bundle, it would be helpful to point to somewhere that explains where this path comes from - the doc for the image has it in, for example.

```

> But we also need to specify a user to log into the database.

Reviewer 2: This is wrong, I'm afraid - we specified the user in the environment variable. All the user stuff is related to running Chrome, based on the current config we have in our apps - hopefully this won't be too brittle in the foreseeable future. The other point here is that we should avoid running containers as root in general: https://medium.com/@mccode/processes-in-containers-should-not-run-as-root-2feae3f0df3b, although this is more of a best practice for production than something necessary for development.

#### Create a database user

*   Add the `builder` user to Dockerfile:

```docker
RUN useradd -m builder
USER builder
```

* Re-build content-publisher container:

```shell
$mac docker build -t content-publisher
```

> * Re-run docker with a new flag, `--privileged`, which gives the build user elevated permissions to run postgres:

Reviewer 2: This is actually to run Chrome, which requires certain low-level syscalls, since we run it in 'sandbox' mode.

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm -v $(pwd):/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle --privileged content-publisher bash
```

#### Install Chrome for feature tests

Test will still be failing because we have one have another dependency for Chrome.

* Add the following to the Dockerfile:

```docker

> RUN apt-get install -y libxss1 libappindicator1 libindicator7 && apt-get clean

Reviewer 2: Another cheeky `apt-get clean` to remove here.

RUN wget https://dl.google.com/linux/direct/google-chrome-stable_current_amd64.deb

RUN dpkg -i google-chrome-stable_current_amd64.deb; apt-get -fy install
```

* Then rebuild image and re-run the container:

```shell
$mac docker build -t content-publisher
$mac docker run -it --rm -v $(pwd):/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle --privileged content-publisher bash
```

* Run the tests again:

```shell
$dev cd /apps
$dev bundle exec rake
```

### Fixing IP with Docker Network

IP addresses will be randomly assigned each time the container starts up, which can be a pain when you want containers to talk to each other. As was the case between the [content-publisher] and PostgreSQL containers we've been using so far.

Docker has the notion of Networks which you can provide to each container as a connection that they can use.

* Create a network:

```shell
$mac docker network create content-publisher-network
```

* Run the containers with the new network:

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm -v content-publisher-postgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data --network content-publisher-network --network-alias postgres postgres

> $mac docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle --privileged --network content-publisher-network -e TEST_DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-test -e DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-dev content-publisher:latest bash

Reviewer 2: We've got a stray 'latest' tag here.

Reviewer 2: We've also pre-empted the next section with the env vars.

```

### All in one line command

> Combining all of the above into a single line to execute:

Reviewer 2: We're missing an explanation of moving the 'export' commands out of the container and into the command line. It might just be easier to start with them on the command line :-).

```
docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/app -v content-publisher-bundle:/usr/local/bundle --privileged --network content-publisher-network -e TEST_DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-test -e DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres@postgres/content-publisher-dev -w /app content-publisher:latest bash
```

This is a lot to run in one command!

Luckily, we can convert this long command into some YAML configuration which defines all the volumes and dependencies. We can then run that YAML file use [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/), for example:

`docker-compose run —rm content-publisher bundle exec rake`

> We can even run the above command as a CLI script to make it shorter and more reusable between our repos. This is what [govuk-docker][govuk-docker] does.

Reviewer 2: Would be helpful to link to a simple compose file that demos this - probably not the actual ones in the repo, since they have all the extra interpolation/stack/volume stuff.

## Summary

In this tutorial you have been introduced to the concept of:

* the `docker run` command
* images (like a class)
* containers (like instances of a class)
* building images
* creating and adding volumes

> * specifying dependencies with a Dockerfile

Reviewer 2: We should avoid the term 'dependencies', as this concept is used to mean something different in docker-compose. Perhaps 'installing extra libraries' or similar.

#### Use PostgreSQL image/container

Docker containers are quick to start and it's possible for them to talk to each other, so let's set up a separate container for postgres. This approach also follows the Docker way, which is to have one container per process.

*  In another terminal, if we run the following to start a new container based on the postgres image:

```shell
$mac docker run -it --rm postgres
```

* Now to see what containers you have, run:

```shell
$mac docker ps
```

And you should see (ignore any other containers you've got running):

```shell
$mac
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND                  CREATED             STATUS              PORTS               NAMES
a7b87be3e1bc        postgres            "docker-entrypoint.s…"   21 minutes ago      Up 21 minutes       5432/tcp            jovial_matsumoto
```

* Find the ID for the postgres container, and with it run:

```shell
$mac docker inspect [container ID for postgres]
```

Grab the IP address from the output. We will use that IP address to point the content-publisher container to the one running postgres. Rails will use this to run its tests against.

> *   Set these environment variables:

Reviewer: I wonder if we need to make it clear that these are run inside the content-publisher container?
